--- Page 1 ---
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Colloids and Surfaces A
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/colsurfa
Dispersion performances and adsorption behavior of novel block
polycarboxylate with hybrid side chains in coal-water slurry
Junfeng Zhu *, Weichun Gao, Pei Wang, Ting Zhu, Junguo Li
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Chemical Additives for Industry, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Shaanxi University of Science and Technology, Xi’ an, 710021,
China
GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Block polycarboxylate with hybrid side chainsAdsorptionDispersion mechanism
Coal-water slurry
Apparent viscosityABSTRACT
A serial of novel block polycarboxylate dispersants (PCDs) with hybrid side chains employing long-short com-
posite side chains for making coal-water slurry (CWS) were synthesized and applied to a low rank coal in the
north of China to make slurry. The relationship of the ﬁne structure of side chains and properties of the CWS
were investigated. The results show that the apparent viscosity, zeta potential and stability of the CWS are
impacted by the molar ratio of short side chain to long side chain of the PCD. Meanwhile, the viscosity reduction,
stability property and zeta potentials of the CWSs are increased in accord with the order of adsorption amount of
PCD on coal. These facts con ﬁrm that the PCD with a molar ratio of the short side chain to long side chain of just
over unity more easily forms a larger adsorption amount on the coal surface and has optimal dispersion and
stability characteristics. It is helpful to regulate the adsorption behavior of polycarboxylate dispersant to im-
prove its dispersion property. It provides a good pathway to design and prepare a highly eﬀ ective dispersant for
low rank coal.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2020.124644Received 14 January 2020; Received in revised form 28 February 2020; Accepted 29 February 2020⁎Corresponding author.
E-mail address: zjfeng123123@163.com (J. Zhu).Colloids and Surfaces A 594 (2020) 124644
Available online 29 February 2020
0927-7757/ © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
T

--- Page 2 ---
1. Introduction
Coal-water slurry (CWS) is urgently necessary to cater for the in-
creasing use of energy and environmental demands and also to utilize
the coal resources e ﬃciently, economically, and cleanly [ 1]. The visc-
osity, ﬂuidity and stability of coal-water slurry have an important in-
ﬂuence on its pipeline transportation, atomization, and combustion
eﬃciency [ 2]. The dispersant plays an important role in improving the
properties of CWS. The in ﬂuence of the dispersant on the slurrying of
coal is very important, and a suitable dispersing agent is very necessaryfor low rank coals to make slurries [ 3]. On the premise of ensuring the
viscosity of the slurry, the dispersant can improve the concentration ofthe slurry to the maximum extent [ 4]. Furthermore, using a proper
dispersant can increase the utilization ratio of coal [ 5]. In the system of
coal water slurry, coal particles are dispersed by using the electrostatic
repulsion and the spatial resistance of the dispersant adsorbed on their
surface [ 6]. The dispersion properties of dispersants are closely related
to the adsorption con ﬁguration and assembly morphologies in the coal
water interface. The factors which a ﬀect the assembly of the dispersants
in the coal water interface include the surface properties of the coal, thestructural characteristics of the dispersants, and the dosage and solid
content of the dispersants [ 7]. The factors which a ﬀect the rheological
properties and application performance of the CWS are mainly theamount of the dispersant on the surface of the coal particles, the ad-
sorption amount, the adsorption strength and the thickness of the ad-
sorbed layer. Through the study of these factors, the molecular struc-
ture can be designed to achieve the best matching of dispersant for
diﬀerent kinds of coal [ 8].
At present, in the Chinese coal industry expanding the proportion of
low-rank coal-water slurry will be an important way to develop coal-
water slurry technology in China. The key problem is how to improve
the performance of high concentration low-rank coal slurry [ 1,4].
However, because of the high oxygen content and the dense surface
hydrophilic groups in lower rank coal, the dispersant does not closely
adsorb on the surface of coal, which leads to the easy desorption of the
dispersant when the coal water slurry is at a high temperature or is in a
high shear environment [ 9]. This makes the viscosity of the coal water
slurry increase sharply, which greatly inhibits its ability to be trans-ported and atomized. In order to meet the requirements of industrial
production, it is essential to research environmentally friendly and ef-
ﬁcient dispersants for developing the coal-water slurry industry [ 10].
In recent years, a serial of new anionic, amphoteric and long-side
chain polycarboxylic acid dispersants were successfully synthesized for
the low rank coal-water slurry [ 11,13], such as Shenfu coal, Bingchang
coal and Inner Mongolia coal. The e ﬀect of polycarboxylic acid struc-
ture on the slurry formation of low-rank coal was systematically stu-
died. Furthermore, the dispersion mechanism of the polycarboxylate
dispersant was discussed. The optimum ratio of ionic side groups in the
polycarboxylate was found in the study of low rank coal slurry [ 12]. At
the same time, the polycarboxylic acid with moderate side chain lengthhad better dispersion properties, viscosity reduction and stability than
others [ 13]. Based on the particular advantages of long and short
chains,
polycarboxylic acid with composite long and short side chains
can play a synergistic role in dispersion for CWS. The longer side chain
is bene ﬁcial to greater space resistance, but it is not conducive to the
increase of the main chain polymerization degree and the decrease ofthe main chain. On the contrary, the shorter side chain is not conducive
to the formation of stronger steric hindrance. Therefore, it is very im-
portant to combine the advantages of long chains and short chains of
the polycarboxylate.
The adsorption of dispersant molecules on the surface of coal par-
ticles is a prerequisite for good dispersion properties. The properties of
polycarboxylates as dispersants are largely determined by their ad-
sorption properties at the interface of coal and water [ 8]. However,
since there is no full understanding of the details of the adsorptionprocess related to the action mechanism of the dispersant, precisecontrol of adsorption behavior is often a challenging job. As the ad-
sorption properties are dependent on the chemical structure of the
dispersant [ 14], the in ﬂuence of the composite structure of long-short
chains of the polycarboxylate on its adsorption on the coal surface iswell worth researching.
In this study, novel block polycarboxylate dispersant containing
hybrid side chains was ﬁrst synthesized, which combines the dispersing
property of the long side chain and the short side chain dispersant. Byanalyzing the dispersing properties of the PC dispersants having various
molar ratios of long side chain to short side chain, the inﬂ uence of the
dispersant structure on the adsorption is discussed. Meanwhile, therelationship between the adsorption amount and the viscosity, stability
and the zeta potential is developed to understand the details of the
adsorption process related to the action mechanism of the dispersant. It
is helpful to regulate the adsorption behavior of polycarboxylate dis-
persant to improve its dispersion characteristic. Furthermore, it pro-
vides a good pathway to design and prepare a highly e ﬀective dis-
persant for low rank coal.
2. Experimental2.1. Materials
Allyl polyoxyethylene ethers (APEG) with di ﬀerent molecular
weights ( M
w= 600,1200 were purchased from Jiangsu Haian Chemical
ReagentChina; methacrylic acid MAA was purchased from Tianjin
Chemical ReagentChina; Azobisisobutyl hydrazine dihydrochloride
AIBA as initiator was purchased from Shanghai Macklin Biochemical
Co., Ltd. S-S'-bis a,a'-dimethyl-a"-acetate- trithiocarbonate BDATT as
chain transfer reagent was synthesized according to the literature
[15,16].
2.2. Preparation
2.2.1. General procedure for preparation of a typical polycarboxylate
dispersant
The short chain macromonomer APEG600 ( n= 14) and a certain
amount of water were added to a ﬂask with magnetic agitator, and
reﬂux condensing tube under a continuous nitrogen atmosphere. Then
reaction solution in the ﬂask was heated and stirred to dissolve it fully,
then its temperature was raised. After that, a certain amount of me-thacrylic acid (MAA) aqueous solution, BDATT as RAFT reagent and
AIBA dissolved in deionized water as the initiator were added to the
mixture solution drop by drop. After the mixture solution was kept at a
ﬁxed temperature in nitrogen atmosphere, the product of step 1 was
obtained. The step 1 production was purity through precipitated inethyl alcohol and dried in vacuum. Then the long chain macromonomer
APEG1200 ( m= 23) and AIBA which were dissolved in deionized water
were dropped into the product of step 1 then held at a constant tem-perature. After the pH value was adjusted to about 7 –8 using 30 %
NaOH aqueous solution, the hybrid polycarboxylic acid dispersantsPCD containing composite long and short side chains was obtained (see
Fig. 1).
In order to choose the premium ratios of short side chain to long
side chain, a series of polycarboxylic acid dispersants PCD-1 ∼PCD-5
containing various ratios of short side chain to long side chain weresynthesized according to the di ﬀerent ratios of monomers in poly-
merization. As controlled samples, a series of random free copolymersPC
Ran1∼PCRan5 were prepared with MAA, APEG600 and APEG1200 by
traditional free polymerization.
2.2.2. Coal sample and coal-water slurries preparation
A low rank coal, Shenfu coal was choose to be used in this work.
Raw Shenfu coal was dried in the air, and what is more it was crushed
and sieved with di ﬀerent meshes. The results of the proximate and
ultimate analyses of Shenfu coal samples were shown in Table 1. TheJ. Zhu, et al. Colloids and Surfaces A 594 (2020) 124644
2

--- Page 3 ---
particle size distribution of Shenfu coal sample was determined via the
laser particle size analyzer (BT-9300Z, Dandong, China). The result was
shown in Fig. 2 . The average size of volume for the coal particles was
about 25.35 μm. The coal powder was slowly mixed in a pot containing
a certain quantity of PCD and deionized water. The mixture was con-
tinuously stirred by a mixer during the addition of coal [ 17], and then
the stirring of the slurry was continued for another 10 min at 1200 rpmto ensure the homogenization of the CWS. The slurry was then studied
to understand its characteristics.2.3. Measurement
2.3.1. Structure characterization of PCD
The above PCD was puri ﬁed by precipitating in the solvent of di-
chloromethane and acetone. Then it was dried in a liquid nitrogen cold
trap at a temperature of −70℃and a vacuum of -0.5 MPa. The powder
of the dried and pure PCD was ground with the dried potassium bro-mide then pressed into a sheet to test infrared spectroscopy using
VECTOR-22 infrared spectrometer produced by Bruker, Germany. After
the 15−20 mg of the powder of the PCD was completely dissolved in
deuterated dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), it was transferred into the nu-clear magnetic tube. The chemical structure was analyzed by a
400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance instrument (NMR). The puri ﬁed
and dried PCD was dissolved in 0.1 mol·L
−1NaNO 3aqueous solution.
Then it was measured by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) for
relative molecular weight at the test temperature of 30 ℃, using
0.1 mol·L−1NaNO 3solution with the ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL·min−1as a
mobile phase. The injection quantity of the sample was 20 μL. The
molecular weight was quanti ﬁed by the polyethylene glycol standard
samples.
2.3.2. Viscometric measurements
The apparent viscosity of coal-water slurries was tested by rhe-
ometer (the United States, Brook ﬁeld, R/S-SST Plus), at 25 ℃. The CWS
was prepared at solid content of 64.0 –69.0 wt% and the polycarboxylic
acid dispersant (solid content calculated to be 30 wt%) was added into
CWS at a dosage of 0.10-0.50 wt % to comply with the needs of the coal
gasiﬁcation industry. The viscosity value at a shear rate of 100s−1was
used as the apparent viscosity of the suspension, unless otherwise stated[13].
2.3.3. Stability measurements
The static stability of the CWS was evaluated by the water separ-
ating test (water separating ratio, v/v%) and 72 h (3 days) storage time(h) in a similar manner for all samples at room temperature [ 19]. The
static stability of the CWS is inversely proportional to its water separ-ating ratio. The static stability of CWS was determined by a water se-
parating ratio W
b. The stability tends to increase with the decrease in
the water separating ratio. The smaller Wbis, the better stability of the
CWS. The water separating ratio was calculated according to Eq. (1).
Wb(v/v%) = V/V0× 100 % (1)
where V(ml) was referred to the volume of upper water in the CWS
Fig. 1. The chemical structure of a typical hybrid polycarboxylate dispersant.
Table 1
Proximate and ultimate analyses of Shenfu coal sample on air dried basis.
Item Content
Proximate analyses Inherent moisture (wt%) 9.63
Ash (wt%) 14.11
Volatile matter (wt%) 37.67
Fixed carbon (wt%) 52.70
Ultimate analyses Carbon (wt%) 65.12
Sulfur (wt%) 0.41
Hydrogen (wt%) 4.55
Oxygen (wt%) 14.82
Nitrogen (wt%) 0.97
Oxygen/carbon ratio (wt%) 0.23
Fig. 2. The distribution of Shenfu coal particle size.J. Zhu, et al. Colloids and Surfaces A 594 (2020) 124644
3

--- Page 4 ---
after 72 h, V0(ml) was the total volume of the CWS.
2.3.4. Adsorption experiments
The adsorbed amount of the PCD on coal particles was calculated by
determining the amount of free polycarboxylate in the solution. The
concentration of PCD in the solution was measured using total organic
carbon analyzer (Elementar vario TOC cube, Germany) and calculated
according to Eq. (2).
TOC = Kc + b (2)
where TOC is the total organic carbon in the dispersant solution
(mg·L−1)；Kis the factor of proportionality of TOC to the concentra-
tion of dispersant ；cis the concentration of the dispersant solution
(mg·L−1);b is the constant of proportionality of TOC to the concentra-
tion of dispersant(mg·L−1).
The fraction of organic compounds eluted from the coal in the coal
water mixture without a polymer dispersant was measured as a blank
value to o ﬀset background absorption of dissolved matter from coal.
The amount of polymer adsorbed on coal particles was tested and cal-culated according to the literature [ 8]. Then adsorption isotherm of the
polycarboxylate dispersant on coal was obtained using the ﬁtting of the
adsorption at various original concentrations of PCD.
2.3.5. ESEM –EDS measurement
Raw coal samples and complex coal samples which were adsorbing
the dispersant PCD-2, were ﬁltered from coal-water slurries and washed
three times by water, then vacuum dried into dry particles. After that,
the particles were pressed on conductive tapes and observed by Q45Environment Scanning Electron Microscopy ESEM and Energy
Dispersive Spectrometer EDS from FEI, US. The magni ﬁcation was ﬁxed
at 2400× [ 18].
2.3.6. Zeta potential measurements
The zeta potential of the coal particles in the CWS was determined
by ZEN3690 Zetasizer (Malvern Instruments Corp., British) [ 19]. Three
zeta potential measurements were made, and then the mean value ofthem was utilized in this study.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Characteristics of dispersants
The two types of polycarboxylic acid dispersants PCD-1 ∼PCD-5 and
PC
Ran1∼PCRan5 were prepared to study the e ﬀect of the various ratio of
short side chain to long side chain on PC dispersants (in Table 2). As
shown in Table 2, the two types of PCs respectively are synthesized by
RAFT polymerization and random polymerization. The relative mole-
cular weight of the PC Ranby random polymerization is about equal to
that of the PCD by RAFT polymerization. However, the molecular
weight distribution of the PCD is relatively narrower than that of the
PCRan. Every molecular weight of PCD is about 10,000. Besides, each of
their molecular weight distribution is close to 1.
Fig. 3a shows the infrared spectrum of PCD by the RAFTpolymerization. The structure analysis results of spectra were as fol-lows: The stretching vibration absorption peak of carboxylic hydroxyl is
at 3560.90 cm
−1. The stretching vibration absorption peaks of the
carbon-hydrogen bond and carbon-oxygen bond in ether are respec-tively at 2863.12 cm
−1and 1103.65 cm−1. The carbonyl group
stretching vibration peak is at 1728.04 cm−1. No peak of carbon-carbon
double bond that proves the reaction of all monomers is completed. The
methylene carbon-hydrogen bending vibration absorption peak is at
1470.44 cm−1. The carbon-hydrogen bending vibration absorption
peak of methyl is at 1351.98 cm−1.
As presented in Fig. 3b, the chemical shift δis the hydrogen proton
peak in the polymer between 0.9 –1.1 ppm. The peak between
1.6–1.9 ppm is the hydrogen proton of the main chain of the PCD. The
peaks of 2.0 –2.2 ppm are attributed to the hydrogen proton of methine
between the polyether side chain and the polymer main chain. The
peaks of 3.5 –3.7 ppm are the hydrogen proton of hydroxyl at the end of
the polyether side chain. The peaks of 3.8 –4.0 ppm are the hydrogen
proton of methylene close to the hydroxyl in the polyether chain. The
peaks of 4.5 –4.8 ppm are the hydrogen proton of methylene which
connected with the ether bond in the polyether chain. No peak is foundat about 5.7 ppm (i.e. the hydrogen related to the double bond), which
represents the disappearance of double bonds. Based on the analyses of
1H-NMR and FT-IR spectra, it is clearly seen that the synthesized
polymer is the target polycarboxylic acid.
3.2. Slurry properties of CWS with PCD
Fig. 4a indicates the e ﬀect of the polycarboxylic acid dispersants
prepared by two methods on apparent viscosity of the CWS. The
average value of the apparent viscosity of the CWS was obtained when
the slurry concentration was 66 wt% and the dispersant content was
0.4 wt%. As Fig. 4a shows, the e ﬀects of the dispersants synthesized by
the two methods on the concentration of coal slurry are de ﬁnitely dif-
ferent. The apparent viscosity of the CWS with the PCD synthesized by
the RAFT method is lower than that of PC Ransynthesized by random
copolymerization under the same molar ratio of long and short sidechains. The results show that the PCD has a better viscosity reduction
eﬀect on coal-water slurry than the PC
Ran. The stability results of the
above CWSs in Fig. 4b were characterized by the water separating ratio
method. Under the same molar ratio of long and short side chains, the
water separating ratio of the CWS with the PCD is less than that of
PCRan.It means that the stability of the CWS with the PCD is better than
that of PC Ran.By comparing the apparent viscosity and dispersion sta-
bility of CWSs using PCD with di ﬀerent molar ratios of short and long
side chains, it can be concluded that the PCD-2, PCD-3 and PCD-4 withthe hybrid-length side chains has better dispersion stability than that of
other the polycarboxylic acid with only long side chains (PCD-5) or
only short side chains (PCD-1). Especially, PCD-2 shows the best visc-
osity reduction e ﬀect and dispersion stability which may be due to the
absorption behavior of PCD on coal particles surface.
As shown in Fig. 4c, the apparent viscosity of the CWS in presence of
PCDs having composite side chains decreased with increasing shearrate. The CWS behaves as a non-Newtonian ﬂuid with shear thinning.
Two most widely used rheological models, Herschel-Bulkley andPower-law used in CWS, were applied to ﬁt the curves of stress-shear
rate in Fig. 4d. The ﬁtting results were shown in Table 3. As presented
inTable 3, the rheological properties of the coal water slurry are more
consistent with Herschel-Bulkley because the correlation coe ﬃcient
(R
2) of the Herschel-Bulkley model was closer to 1 than that of Power-
law model. Meanwhile, as the ﬂow behavior index (n) was less than 1,
the coal water slurry behaved as a pseudoplastic ﬂuid which is good for
stability and storage of CWS. Besides, as shown in Table 3, the order of
apparent viscosity of CWSs at shear rate of 100s−1from lowest to
highest is PCD-2 < PCD-3 < PCD-4 < PCD-1 < PCD-5, which is in
agreement with the consistency coe ﬃcient ( K). According to reference
[20], the CWS with the larger ﬂow characteristic index has betterTable 2
Molecular weight and distribution results for two types of polycarboxylic acid
dispersants.
Entry n MAA:nAPEG600 :nAPEG1200 PCRan PCD
Mw Mn PDI Mw Mn PDI
#1 4 :1: 0 10154 6550 1.55 9854 9040 1.09
#2 4 :0.75:0.25 12030 7613 1.58 11667 10324 1.13
#3 4 :0.5: 0.5 13357 8348 1.60 12507 10336 1.21
#4 4 :0.25 :0.75 13117 8408 1.56 12300 9840 1.25#5 4 :0:1 14322 9007 1.59 13117 10168 1.29J. Zhu, et al.
Colloids and Surfaces A 594 (2020) 124644
4

--- Page 5 ---
ﬂowability. Thus we can conclude that the CWS with dispersant PCD-2
has better ﬂowability because it has a larger ﬂow behavior index. The
reason for this may be diverse adsorption of PCD on the coal surface
[21].
3.3. Adsorption studies
3.3.1. Adsorption morphology
The ESEM images and EDS analysis of raw Shenfu coal powder and
complex coal powder which adsorbed the PCDs are presented in Fig. 5.
It can be seen from Fig. 5a that there are no gaps between the raw coalparticles which aggregate together. When the dispersant PCD-2 was
adsorbed on the coal to form complex coal ( Fig. 5b), the intergranular
gaps between the complex coals are observed. As a result, the disper-sion of coal powder becomes better. It may be because the large speci ﬁc
surface of the coal powder is reduced after the surface of coal is mod-iﬁed by the CD. Therefore, the PCD weakens the aggregation of coal
particles and disperses them in coal water slurry [ 22]. Based on the
element content on the coal particle surface from EDS analysis ( Fig. 5c),
there are a fraction of ionic groups on coal surface containing oxygen
such as carboxyl group, hydroxyl group and salts. Furthermore, it can
be seen that the elements on the surface of the complex coal particle
Fig. 3. The FT-IR spectra (a)of PCD-2 and (b)1H-NMR of PCD-2.
Fig. 4. Apparent viscosity (a)and stability (b)of CWSs with 0.4 wt% PCD and PC Ransynthesized by random polymerization under the conditions of 66 wt% coal
concentration, pH 7, 25 °C, and shear rate of 100s−1. Apparent viscosity (c)and shear stress (d)as functions of shear rate for coal slurries with 0.4 wt% PCDs having
composite side chains under the conditions of 66 wt% coal concentration, pH 7, 25 °C, and shear rate from 0 to 100s−1.J. Zhu, et al. Colloids and Surfaces A 594 (2020) 124644
5

